---
title: "Ph.D. Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
layout: single
---

My Ph.D thesis is available [here](https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/92159?show=full). You can download the entire thesis [here (35 MB)](https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/92159/897123391-MIT.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y).

*How can it be that writing down a few simple and elegant formulae, like short poems governed by strict rules such as those of the sonnet or the waka, can predict universal regularities of Nature? Perhaps we see equations as simple because they are easily expressed in terms of mathematical notation already invented at an earlier stage of development of the science, and thus what appears to us as elegance of description really reflects the interconnectedness of Nature's laws at different levels.*

-Murray Gell-Mann, 1969 Nobel Prize in Physics Banquet Speech.

We typically learn in grade school that all materials can be classified as either being a solid, liquid, or a gas. However this is a vast simiplification of real life. Materials we use daily in critical applications are often neither solid nor liquid: they can be soft, squishy, stretchy, slimy, tacky, stringy, etc. Is chewing gum a fluid or liquid? What about silly putty? Toothpaste? How about a sand dune that can remain stable in a mound for centuries under quiescent conditions, but can flow like a liquid downhill when a strong breeze destabilizes the dune. See this [fascinating video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XK_oEQOlsKY) of how sand can flow like a liquid. 

Our simple grade school classification of materials into the three buckets of solids, liquids and gasses is woefully inadequate to capture the richness of materials we use daily. More generally, these are called *complex fluids*, and comprise a diverse class of materials such as emulsions, foams, colloidal dispersions, suspensions, polymer melts and solutions, chemically and physically cross-linked gels, etc. Ultimately, these complex behaviors arise from the constituent building blocks of the material: the chemical identity of the molecules and the material microstructure, i.e., *manner in which they are arranged*. 

Because complex fluids are used in advanced applications, it is important to possess mathematical models that can predict their mechanical behavior upon stretching, squeezing or applying a force to it. Developing such relationships between *applied deformation* and *resulting stresses* (or vice-versa) for the complex fluid is called constitutive modeling. My thesis developed constitutive models for complex fluids that have *fractal* or multiscale microstructures. What are these?

Many systems in nature contain patterns or networks with multiple length scales. For example, the rocky faces of the great mountain ranges of the Earth exhibit cracks, fractures and fissures that are of many different sizes. There are long and thick cracks that run down the face of the mountain, from which shorter and thinner cracks branch off. From these smaller cracks, in turn, still smaller cracks originate, and this process continues over many different size scales (or length scales) along the mountain side. We term such systems that possess features across multiple length scales as multiscale systems. In figure 1.1.1 we show two examples of multiscale systems found in nature: river deltas, with streams breaking up into smaller and smaller tributaries and the perimeter of rain clouds. Other examples of multiscale patterns found in nature are continental or island coastlines and galaxy clustering in the cosmos. Such multiscale systems often share the properties of self-similarity, or being invariant under a change of scale. In other words, they look the same when inspected *from nearby or from far*. The mathematical ideal of such scale-invariant systems are [fractal geometries](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractal). These geometries theoretically posses every possible length scale, and are hence truly scale-free. Mathematicians have considered the concepts of scale-invariance and scale-free patterns through various striking and beautiful geometrical constructions such as the Koch snowflake, the Sierpinski Gasket, and Peano curves. Many of these fractal geometrical constructions contain infinitely many length scales, and are perfectly non-random. However, physical systems do not conform to the mathematical ideal of non-random fractals. Physical systems are random fractals, and only look approximately the same at different length scales. Furthermore, they only exhibit scale-free behavior over a bounded range of length scales, and cannot be fractal in the strictest sense. Therefore, we will term all physical systems as being multiscale, rather than scale-free or fractal. 

In my thesis, I developed compact constitutive models to characterize, describe and predict the mechanical behavior of multiscale complex fluids under a single powerful mathematical framework utilizing fractional derivatives or non-integer order derivatives. The results of my work are useful for the advanced applications of a diverse range of complex fluids including crosslinked polymer networks, microgel dispersions, foams, colloidal suspensions, and soft glassy materials. 